I’m pretty much screwed.
That’s my considered opinion.
Screwed.
Six days in to what should be a greatest two months of my life, and
it’s turned in to a nightmare.
I don’t even know who’ll read this. I guess someone will find it
eventually. Maybe a hundred years from now.
For the record... I didn’t die on Sol 6. Certainly the rest of the crew
thought I did, and I can’t blame them. Maybe there’ll be a day of national
mourning for me, and my Wikipedia page will say “Mark Watney is the
only human being to have died on Mars.”
And it’ll be right, probably. Cause I’ll surely die here. Just not on Sol
6 when everyone thinks I did.
Let’s see... where do I begin?
The Ares program. Mankind reaching out to Mars to send people to
another planet for the very first time and expand the horizons of
humanity blah, blah, blah. The Ares 1 crew did their thing and came back
heroes. They got the parades and fame and love of the world.
Ares 2 did the same thing, in a different location on Mars. They got a
firm handshake and a hot cup of coffee when they got home.
Ares 3. Well. That was my mission. Well, not mine per se.
Commander Lewis was in charge. I was just one of her crew. Actually, I
was the very lowest ranked member of the crew. I would only be “in
command” of the mission if I were the only remaining person.
What do you know? I’m in command.
I wonder if this log will be recovered before the rest of the crew die of
old age? I presume they got back to Earth all right. Well, guys, if you’re
reading this: It wasn’t your fault. You did what you had to do. In your
position I would have done the same thing. I don’t blame you, and I’m
glad you survived.
I guess I should explain how Mars missions work, for any layman
who may be reading this. We got to earth orbit the normal way, through
an ordinary ship to Hermes. All the Ares missions use Hermes to get to
and from Mars. It’s really big and cost a lot so NASA only built one.
Once we got to Hermes, four additional unmanned missions brought
us fuel and supplies while we prepared for our trip. Once everything was
a go, we set out for Mars. But not very fast. Gone are the days of heavy
chemical fuel burns and trans-Mars injection orbits.
Hermes is powered by ion engines. They throw Argon out the back of
the ship really fast to get a tiny amount of acceleration. The thing is, it
doesn't take much reactant mass, so a little Argon (and a nuclear reactor
to power things) let us accelerate constantly the whole way there. You'd
be amazed at how fast you can get going with a tiny acceleration over a
long time.
I could regale you with tales of how we had great fun on the trip, but I
won’t. We did have fun, but I don’t feel like reliving it right now. Suffice
it to say we got to Mars 124 days later without strangling each other.
From there, we took the MDV (Mars Descent Vehicle) to the surface.
The MDV is basically a big can with some light thrusters and parachutes
attached. Its sole purpose is to get six humans from Mars orbit to the
surface without killing any of them.
And now we come to the real trick of Mars exploration: Having all
our shit there in advance.
A total of 14 unmanned missions deposited everything we would need
for surface operations. They tried their best to land all the supply vessels
in the same general area, and did a reasonably good job. Supplies aren’t
nearly so fragile as humans and can hit the ground really hard. But they
tended to bounce around a lot.
Naturally, they didn’t send us to Mars until they’d confirmed all the
supplies had made it to the surface and their containers weren’t breached.
Start to finish, including supply missions, a Mars mission takes about 3
years. In fact, there were Ares 3 supplies en route to Mars while 