had to be portable, so they used a simple chemical absorption process
with expendable filters. I’d been asleep long enough that my filters were
useless.
The suit saw this problem and moved in to an emergency mode the
engineers call “bloodletting”. Having no way to separate out the CO2, the
suit deliberately vented air to the Martian atmosphere, then back-filled
with nitrogen. Between the breach and the bloodletting, it quickly ran out
of nitrogen. All it had left was my oxygen tank.
So it did the only thing it could to keep me alive. It started back-
filling with pure oxygen. I now risked dying from oxygen toxicity, as the
excessively high amount of oxygen threatened to burn up my nervous
system, lungs, and eyes. An ironic death for someone with a leaky space
suit: too much oxygen.
Every step of the way would have had beeping alarms, alerts, and
warnings. But it was the high-oxygen warning that woke me.
The sheer volume of training for a space mission is astounding. I
spent a week back on Earth practicing emergency space suit drills. I knew
what to do.
Carefully reaching to the side of my helmet, I got the breach kit. It’s
nothing more than a funnel with a valve at the small end, and an
unbelievably sticky resin on the wide end. The idea is you have the valve
open and stick the wide end over a hole. The air can escape through the
valve, so it doesn’t interfere with the resin making a good seal. Then you
close the valve and you’ve sealed the breach.
The tricky part was getting the antenna out of the way. I pulled it out
as fast as I could, wincing as the sudden pressure drop dizzied me and
made the wound in my side scream in agony.
I got the breach kit over the hole and sealed it. It held. The suit back-
filled the missing air with yet more oxygen. Checking my arm readouts, I
saw the suit was now at 85% oxygen. For reference, Earth’s atmosphere
is about 21%. I’d be ok, so long as I didn’t spend too much time like that.
I stumbled up the hill back toward the Hab. As I crested the rise, I saw
something that made me very happy and something that made me very
sad: The Hab was in-tact (yay!) and the MAV was gone (boo!).
Right that moment I knew I was screwed. But I didn’t want to just die
out on the surface. I limped back to the Hab and fumbled my way in to an
airlock. As soon as it equalized, I threw off my helmet.
Entering the Hab, I doffed the suit and got my first good look at the
injury. It would need stitches. Fortunately, all of us had been trained in
basic medical procedures, and the Hab had excellent medical supplies. A
quick shot of local anesthetic, irrigate the wound, 9 stitches and I was
done. I’d be taking antibiotics for a couple of weeks, but other than that
I’d be fine.
I knew it was hopeless, but I tried firing up the communication array.
No signal, of course. The primary satellite dish had broken off,
remember? And it took the reception antennae with it. The Hab had
secondary and tertiary communication systems, but they were both just
for talking to the MAV, which would use its much more powerful
systems to relay to Hermes. Thing is, that only works if the MAV is still
around.
I had no way to talk to Hermes. In time, I could locate the dish out on
the surface, but it would take weeks for me to rig up any repairs, and that
would be too late. In an abort, Hermes would leave orbit within 24 hours.
The orbital dynamics made the trip safer and shorter the earlier you left,
so why wait for no reason just to make the trip take longer?
Checking out my suit, I saw the antenna had plowed through my bio-
monitor computer. When on an EVA, all the crew’s suits are networked
so we can see each others status. The rest of the crew would have seen the
pressure in my suit drop to nearly 0, followed immediately by my bio-
signs going flat. Add to that I was sent tumbling down a hill with a spear
through me in the middle of a sandstorm... yeah. They thought I was
dead. How could they not?
They may have even had a brief discussion about recovering my body,
but regulations were clear. In the event a crewman died on Mars, he
stayed on Mars. Leaving his body behind reduced weight for the MAV on
the trip back. That meant more disposable fuel and a larger margin of
error for the return thrust. No point in giving that up for sentimenta