starts condensing on every surface. Then I’ll be licking the walls. Yay.
Anyway, for now, no problems with the Water Reclaimer.
So yeah. Food, water, shelter all taken care of. I’m going to start
rationing food right now. Meals are pretty minimal already, but I think I
can eat a 3/4 portion per meal and still be all right. That should turn my
300 days of food in to 400. Foraging around the medical area, I found the
main bottle of vitamins. There’s enough multivitamins there to last years.
So I won’t have any nutritional problems (though I’ll still starve to death
when I’m out of food, no matter how many vitamins I take).
The medical area has morphine for emergencies. And there’s enough
there for a lethal dose. I’m not going to slowly starve to death, I’ll tell
you that. If I get to that point, I’ll take an easier way out.
Everyone on the mission had two specialties. I’m a botanist and
mechanical engineer. Basically, I was the mission’s fix-it man who
played with plants. The mechanical engineering might save my life if
something breaks.
I’ve been thinking about how to survive this. It’s not completely
hopeless. There’ll be humans back on Mars in about four years when Ares
4 arrives (assuming they didn’t cancel the program in the wake of my
“death”).
Ares 4 will be landing at the Schiaparelli Crater, which is about
3,200km away from my location here in the Acidalia Planitia. No way for
me to get there on my own. But if I could communicate, I might be able
to get a rescue. Not sure how they’d manage that with the resources on
hand, but NASA has a lot of smart people.
So that’s my mission now. Find a way to communicate with Earth. If I
can’t manage that, find a way to communicate with Hermes when it
returns in 4 years with the Ares 4 crew.
Of course, I don’t have any plan for surviving 4 years on 1 year of
food. But one thing at a time here. For now, I’m well fed and have a
purpose: “Fix the damn radio”.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 10
Well, I’ve done three EVAs and haven’t found any hint of the
communication dish.
I dug out one of the rovers and had a good drive around, but after days
of wandering I think it’s time to give up. The storm probably blew the
dish far away and then erased any drag-marks or scuffs that might have
led to a trail. Probably buried it, too.
I spent most of today out at what’s left of the communication array.
It’s really a sorry sight. I may as well yell toward Earth for all the good
that damned thing will do me.
I could throw together a rudimentary dish out of metal I find around
the base, but this isn’t some walkie-talkie I’m working with here.
Communicating from Mars to Earth is a pretty big deal, and requires
extremely specialized equipment. I won’t be able to whip something up
with tinfoil and gum.
I need to ration my EVAs as well as food. The CO2 filters are not
cleanable. Once they’re saturated, they’re done. The mission accounted
for a 4-hour EVA per crewmember per day. Fortunately, CO2 filters are
light and small so NASA had the luxury of sending more than we needed.
All told, I have about 1500 hours worth of CO2 filters. After that, any
EVAs I do will have to be managed with bloodletting the air.
1500 hours may sound like a lot, but I’m faced with spending at least
4 years here if I’m going to have any hope of rescue, with a minimum of
several hours per week dedicated to sweeping off the solar array.
Anyway. No needless EVAs.
In other news, I’m starting to come up with an idea for food. My
botany background may come in useful after all.
Why bring a botanist to Mars? After all, it’s famous for not having
anything growing here. Well, the idea was to figure out how well things
grow in Martian gravity, and see what, if anything, we can do with
Martian soil. The short answer is: quite a lot... almost. Martian soil has
the basic building blocks needed for plant growth, but there’s a lot of
stuff going on in Earth soil that Mars soil doesn’t have, even when it’s
placed in an Earth-atmosphere and given plenty of water. Bacterial
activity, certain nutrients provided by animal life, etc. None of that is
happening on Mars. One of my tasks for the mission was to see how
plants grow here, in various combinations of Earth or Mars soil and
atmosphere.
That’s why I have a small amount of Earth soil and a bunch of plant
seeds with me.
I can’t get too excited, however. It’s about the amount of soil you’d
put in a window planter-box, and the only seeds I have are a few species
of grass and ferns. They’re the most rugged and easily grown plants on
earth, so NASA picked them as the test subjects.
So I have two problems: not enough dirt, and nothing edible to plant
in it.
But I’m a botanist, damn it. I should be able to find a way to make
this happen. If I don’t, I’ll be a really hungry botanist in about a year.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 11
I wonder how the Cubs are doing.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 14
I got my undergrad degree at the University of Chicago. Half the
people who studied botany were hippies who thought they could return to
some natural world system. Somehow feeding 7 billion people through
pure gathering. They spent most of their time working out better ways to
grow pot. I didn’t like them. I’ve always been in it for the science, not for
any New World Order bullshit.
When they made compost heaps and tried to conserve every little
ounce of living matter, I laughed at them. “Look at the silly hippies!” I
would scoff. “Look at their pathetic attempts to simulate a complex
global ecosystem in their back yard.”
Of course now I’m doing exactly that. I’m saving every scrap of
biomatter I can find. Every time I finish a meal, the leftovers go to the
compost bucket. As for other biological material...
The Hab has sophisticated toilets. Shit is usually vaccum-dried, then
accumulated in sealed bags