labor. I could set the temperature of the Hab higher than normal, meaning
my body expends less energy keeping its temperature. I could cut off an
arm and eat it, gaining me valuable calories and reducing my overall
caloric need.
No, not really.
So let’s say I could clear up that much farmland. Seems reasonable.
Where do I get the water? To go from 62 to 126 square meters of
farmland at 10cm deep, I’ll need 6.4 more cubic meters of soil (more
shoveling, whee!) and that’ll need over 250 liters of water.
The 50L I have is for me to drink if the Water Reclaimer breaks. So
I’m 250L short of my 250L goal.
Bleh. I’m going to bed.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 26
It was a back-breaking yet productive day.
I was sick of thinking, so instead of trying to figure out where I’ll get
250L of water, I did some manual labor. I need to get a whole assload
more soil in to the Hab, even if it is dry and useless right now.
I got a cubic meter in before getting exhausted.
Then, a minor dust-storm dropped by for an hour and covered the
solar collectors with crap. So I had to suit up *again* and do *another*
EVA. I was in a pissy mood the whole time. Sweeping off a huge field of
solar cells is boring and physically demanding. But once the job was
done, I came back to my Little Hab on the Prairie.
It was about time for another dirt-doubling, so I figured I may as well
get it over with. It took an hour. One more doubling and the usable soil
will all be good to go.
Also, I figured it was time to start up a seed crop. I’d doubled the soil
enough that I could afford to leave a little corner of it alone. I had 12
potatoes to work with.
I am one lucky son-of-a-bitch they aren’t freeze-dried or mulched.
Why did NASA send 12 whole potatoes, refrigerated but not frozen? And
why send them along with us as in-pressure cargo rather than in a crate
with the rest of the Hab supplies? Because Thanksgiving was going to
happen while we were doing surface operations, and NASA’s shrinks
thought it would be good to make a meal together. Not just to eat it, but
to actually prepare it. There’s probably some logic to that, but who cares?
I cut each potato in to 4 pieces, making sure each piece had at least 2
eyes. The eyes are where they sprout from. I let them sit for a few hours
to harden a bit, then planted them, well spaced apart, in the corner. God
speed, little taters. My life depends on you.
Normally, it takes 90 days to yield full sized potatoes. But I can’t wait
that long. I’ll need to cut up all the potatoes from this crop to seed the
rest of the field.
By setting the Hab temperature to a balmy 25.5C, the plants will grow
quicker. Also, the internal lights will provide plenty of “sunlight” and I’ll
make sure they get lots of water (once I figure out where to get water).
There will be no foul weather, or any parasites to hassle them, or any
weeds to compete with for soil or nutrients. With all this going for them,
they should yield healthy, sproutable tubers within 40 days.
I figured that was enough being Farmer Mark for one day.
A full meal for dinner. I’d earned it. Plus, I’d burned a ton of calories
and I wanted them back.
I rifled through Commander Lewis’s stuff until I found her personal
data-stick. Everyone got to bring whatever digital entertainment they
wanted, and I was tired of listening to Johanssen’s Beatles Albums for
now. Time to see what Lewis had.
Crappy TV shows. That’s what she had. Countless entire runs of TV
shows from forever ago.
Well. Beggars can’t be choosers. “Three’s Company” it is.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 29
Over the last few days, I got all the dirt in that I’d need. I prepped the
tables and bunks for holding the weight of soil, and even put the dirt in
place. There’s still no water to make it viable, but I have some ideas.
Really bad ideas, but they’re ideas.
Today’s big accomplishment was setting up the pop-tents.
The problem with the rovers’ pop-tents is they weren’t designed for
frequent use.
The idea was you’d throw out a pop-tent, get in, and wait for rescue.
The airlock is nothing more than valves and two doors. Equalize the
airlock with your side of it, get in. equalize with the other side, get out.
This means you lose a lot of air each use. And I’ll need to get in there at
least once a day. The total volume of each pop tent is pretty low, so I
can’t afford to lose air from it.
I spent *hours* trying to figure out how to attach a pop-tent airlock to
a Hab airlock. I have three airlocks in the Hab. I’d be willing to dedicate
two to pop-tents. That would have been awesome.
The frustrating part is pop-tent airlocks *can* attach to other
airlocks! You might have injured people in there, or not enough space
suits. You need to be able to get people out without exposing them to the
Martian atmosphere.
But the pop-tents were designed for your crewmates to come rescue
you in a *rover*. The airlocks on the Hab are much larger and completely
different than the airlocks on the rovers. When you think about it, there’s
really no reason to attach a pop-tent to the Hab.
Unless you’re stranded on Mars and everyone thinks you’re dead and
you’re in a desperate fight against time and the elements to stay alive.
But, you know, other than that edge case there’s no reason.
So I finally decided I’d just take the hit. I’ll be losing some air every
time I enter or exit a pop-tent. The good news is each pop-tent has an air
feed valve on the outside. Remember, these are emergency shelters. The
occupants might need air, and you can provide it from a rover by hooking
up an air line. It’s nothing more than a tube that equalizes the rover’s air
with the pop-tent’s.
The Hab and the rovers use the same valve and tubing standards, so I
was able to attach the pop tents directly to the Hab. That'll automatically
replenish the air I lose with my entries and exits (what we NASA folk call
ingress and egress).
NASA was not .... around with these emergency tents. The moment I
pushed the panic button in the rover, there was an ear-popping whoosh as
the pop-tent fired out, attached to the rover airlock. It took about two
seconds.
I closed the airlock from the rover side and ended up with a nice,
isolated pop-tent. Setting up the equalizer hose was trivial (for once I’m
using equipment the way it was designed to be used). Then, after a few
trips through the airlock (with the air-loss automatically equalized by the
Hab) I got the dirt in.
I repeated the process for the other tent. Everything went really
easily.
Sigh... water.
In high school, I played a lot of Dungeons and Dragons. (You may not
have guessed this Botanist / Mechanical Engineer was a bit of a nerd in
high school, but indeed I was). In the game I played a Cleric. One of the
magic spells I could cast was “Create Water”. I always thought it was a
really stupid spell, and it never came up. Boy what I wouldn’t give to be
able to do that in real life right now.
Anyway. That’s a problem for tomorrow.
For tonight, I have to get back to “Three’s Company.” I stopped last
night in the middle of the episode where Mr. Roper saw something and
took it out of context.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 30
I have an idiotically dangerous plan for getting the water I need. And
boy do I mean *dangerous*. But I don’t have much choice. I’m out of
ideas and I’m due for another dirt-doubling in a few days. When I do the
final doubling, I’ll be doubling on to all that new soil I’ve brought in. If I
don’t wet it first, it’ll just die.
There isn’t a lot of water here on Mars. There’s ice at the poles, but
they’re too far away. If I want water I’ll have to make it from scratch.
Fortunately, I know the recipe: Take hydrogen. Add oxygen. Burn.
Let’s take them one at a time. I’ll start with oxygen.
I have a fair bit of O2 reserves, but not enough to make 250 liters of
water. Two high-pressure tanks at one end of the Hab are my entire
supply (plus the air in the Hab of course). They each contain 25 liters of
liquid O2. The Hab would only use them in an emergency; it has the
Oxygenator to balance the atmosphere. The reason the O2 tanks are here
is to feed the spacesuits and rovers.
Anyway, the reserve oxygen would only be enough to make 100L of
water (50L of O2 makes 100L of molecules that only have one O each).
That would mean no EVAs for me, and no emergency reserves. And it
would make less than half the water I need. Out of the question.
But oxygen’s easier to find on Mars than you might think. The
atmosphere is 98% CO2. And I happen to have a machine whose sole
purpose is liberating oxygen from CO2. Yay Oxygenator!
One problem: The atmosphere is very thin. About 1/90th the pressure
on Earth. So it’s hard to collect. Getting air from outside to inside is
nearly impossible. The whole purpose of the Hab is to keep that sort of
thing from happening. The tiny amount of Martian atmosphere that enters
when I use an airlock is laughable.
That’s where the MAV fuel plant comes in.
My crewmates took the MAV away weeks ago. But the bottom half of
it stayed behind. NASA is not in the habit of putting unnecessary shit in
to orbit. It left the landing gear, ingress ramp, and fuel plant behind.
Remember how the MAV made its own fuel with help from the Martian
atmosphere? Step one of that is to collect CO2 and store it in a high
pressure vessel. Once I get that hooked up to the Hab’s power, it’ll give
me half a liter of liquid CO2 per hour, indefinitely. After 5 days it’ll have
made 125L of CO2, which will make 125L of O2 after I feed it through
the Oxygenator.
That’s enough to make 250L of water. So I have a plan for oxygen.
The hydrogen will be a little trickier.
I considered raiding the hydrogen fuel-cells, but I need those batteries
to maintain power at night. If I don’t have that, It’ll get too cold. I could
bundle up, but the cold would kill my crops. And each fuel cell only has a
small amount of H2 anyway. It’s just not worth sacrificing so much
usefulness for so little gain. The one thing I have going for me is that
energy is not a problem. I don’t want to give that up.
So I’ll have to go a different route.
I often talk about the MAV. But now I want to talk about the MDV.
During the most terrifying 23 minutes of my life, four of my
crewmates and I tried not to shit ourselves while Martinez piloted the
MDV down to the surface. It was kind of like being in a tumble-dryer.
First, we descended from Hermes, and decelerated our orbital velocity
so we could start falling properly. Everything was smooth until we hit the
atmosphere. If you think turbulence is rough in a jetliner going 720kph,
just imagine what it’s like at 28,000kph.
Several staged sets of chutes deployed automatically to slow our
descent, then Martinez manually piloted us to the ground, using the
thrusters to slow descent and control our lateral motion. He’d trained for
this for years, and he did his job extraordinarily well. He exceeded all
plausible expectations of landings, putting us just nine meters from the
target. The guy just plain owned that landing.
Thanks, Martinez! You may have saved my life!
Not because of the perfect landing, but because he left so much fuel
behind. Hundreds of liters of unused Hydrazine. Each molecule of
Hydrazine has four hydrogen atoms in it. So each liter of Hydrazine has
enough hydrogen for *two* liters of water.
I did a little EVA today to check. The MDV has 292L of juice left in
the tanks. Enough to make a almost 600L of water! Way more than I
need!
There’s just one catch: Liberating hydrogen from Hydrazine is...
well... it's how rockets work. It’s really, really hot. And dangerous. If I
do it in an oxygen atmosphere, the heat and newly liberated hydrogen will
explode. There’ll be a 