lot of H2O at the end, but I’ll be too dead to
appreciate it.
At its root, Hydrazine is pretty simple. The Germans used it as far
back as World War II for rocket-assisted fighter fuel (and occasionally
blew themselves up with it).
All you have to do is run it over a catalyst (which I can extract from
the MDV engine) and it will turn in to nitrogen and hydrogen. I’ll spare
you the chemistry, but the end result is that 5 molecules of Hydrazine
becomes 5 molecules of harmless N2 and 10 molecules of lovely H2.
During this process, it goes through an intermediate step of being
ammonia. Chemistry, being the sloppy bitch it is, ensures there’ll be
some ammonia that doesn’t react with the Hydrazine, so it’ll just stay
ammonia. You like the smell of ammonia? Well it’ll be prevalent in my
increasingly hellish existence.
The chemistry is on my side. The question now is how do I actually
make this reaction happen slowly and how do I collect the hydrogen? The
answer is: I don’t know.
I suppose I’ll think of something. Or die.
Anyway, much more important: I simply can’t abide the replacement
of Chrissie with Cindy. “Three’s Company” may never be the same after
this fiasco. Time will tell.
Chapter 4
LOG ENTRY: SOL 32
So I ran in to a bunch of problems with my water plan.
My idea is to make 600L of water (limited by the hydrogen I can get
from the Hydrazine). That means I’ll need 300L of liquid O2.
I can create the O2 easily enough. It takes 20 hours for the MAV fuel
plant to fill its 10L tank with CO2. The Oxygenator can turn it in to O2,
then the Atmospheric Regulator will see the O2 content in the Hab is
high, and pull it out of the air, storing it in the main O2 tanks. They’d fill
up, so I’d have to transfer O2 over to the rovers’ tanks and even space
suit tanks as necessary.
But I can’t create it very quickly. At 1/2L of CO2 per hour, it will
take 25 days to make the oxygen I need. That’s longer than I’d like.
Also, there’s the problem of storing the hydrogen. The air tanks of the
Hab, the rovers, and all the space suits add up to exactly 374L of storage.
To hold all the materials for water, I would need a whopping 900L of
storage.
I considered using one of the rovers as a “tank”. It would certainly be
big enough, but it just isn’t designed to hold in that much pressure. It’s
made to hold (you guessed it) one atmosphere. I need vessels that can
hold 50 times that much. I’m sure a rover would burst.
The best way to store the ingredients of water is to make them be
water. So what’s what I’ll have to do.
The concept is simple, but the execution will be incredibly dangerous.
Every 20 hours, I’ll have 10L of CO2 thanks to the MAV fuel plant.
I’ll vent it in to the Hab via the highly scientific method of detaching the
tank from the MAV landing struts, bringing it in to the Hab, then opening
the valve until it’s empty.
The Oxygenator will turn it in to oxygen in its own time.
Then, I’ll release Hydrazine, VERY SLOWLY, over the iridium
catalyst, to turn it in to N2 and H2. I’ll direct the hydrogen to a small area
and burn it.
As you can see, this plan provides many opportunities for me to die in
a fiery explosion.
Firstly, Hydrazine is some serious death. If I make any mistakes,
there’ll be nothing left but the “Mark Watney Memorial Crater” where
the Hab once stood.
Presuming I don’t .... up with the Hydrazine, there’s still the matter of
burning hydrogen. I’m going to be setting a fire. In the Hab. On purpose.
If you asked every engineer at NASA what the worst scenario for the
Hab was, they’d all answer “fire.” If you asked them what the result
would be, they’d answer “death by fire.”
But if I can pull it off, I’ll be making water continuously, with no
need to store hydrogen or oxygen. It’ll be mixed in to the atmosphere as
humidity, but the Water Reclaimer will pull it out.
I don’t even have to perfectly match the Hydrazine end of it with the
fuel plant CO2 part. There’s plenty of oxygen in the Hab, and plenty more
in reserve. I just need to make sure not to make so much water I run
myself out of O2.
I hooked up the MAV fuel plant to the Hab’s power supply.
Fortunately they both use the same voltage. It’s chugging away,
collecting CO2 for me.
Half-ration for dinner. All I accomplished today was thinking up a
plan that’ll kill me, and that doesn’t take much energy.
I’m going to finish off the last of “Three’s Company” tonight.
Frankly, I like Mr. Furley more than the Ropers.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 33
This may be my last entry.
I’ve known since Sol 6 there was a good chance I’d die here. But I
figured it would be when I ran out of food. I didn’t think it would be this
early.
I’m about the fire up the Hydrazine.
Our mission was designed knowing that anything might need
maintenance, so I have plenty of tools. Even in a space-suit, I was able to
pry the access panels off the MDV and get at the six Hydrazine tanks. I
set them in the shadow of a rover to keep them from heating up too much.
There’s more shade and a cooler temperature near the Hab, but .... that. If
they’re going to blow up, they can blow up a rover, not my house.
Then I pried out the reaction chamber. It took some work and I
cracked the damn thing in half, but I got it out. Lucky for me I don’t need
a proper fuel reaction. In fact, I really, super-duper don’t want a proper
fuel reaction.
I brought all the Hydrazine and reaction chamber in. I briefly
considered only having one tank in at a time to reduce risk. But some
back-of-the-napkin math told me even one tank was enough to blow the
whole Hab up, so why not bring them all in?
The tanks have manual vent valves. I’m not 100% sure what they’re
for. Certainly we were never expected to use them. I think they’re there to
release pressure during the many quality checks done during construction
and before fueling. Whatever the reason, I have valves to work with. All
it takes is a wrench.
I liberated a spare water hose from the Water Reclaimer. With some
thread torn out of a uniform (Sorry, Johanssen), I attached it to the valve
output. Hydrazine is a liquid, so all I have to do is lead it to the reaction
chamber (more of a “reaction bowl” now).
Meanwhile, the MAV fuel plant is still working. I’ve already brought
in one tank of CO2, vented it, and returned it for refilling.
So there are no more excuses. It’s time to start making water.
If you find the charred remains of the Hab, it means I did something
wrong. I’m copying this log over to both rovers so it’s more likely it’ll
survive.
Here goes nothin’
LOG ENTRY: SOL 33 (2)
Well, I didn’t die.
First thing I did was put on the inner lining of my EVA suit. Not the
bulky suit itself, just the inner clothing I wear under it, including the
gloves and booties. Then I got an oxygen mask from the medical supplies
and some lab goggles from Vogel's chem kit. Almost all of my body was
now protected and I would be breathing canned air.
Why? Because Hydrazine is very toxic. If I breathe too much of it I'll
get major lung problems. If I get it on my skin, I'll have chemical burns
for the rest of my life. I wasn't taking any chances.
I turned the valve until a trickle of Hydrazine came out. I let one drop
fall in to the iridium bowl.
It un-dramatically sizzled and disappeared.
But hey, that’s what I wanted. I just freed up hydrogen and nitrogen.
Yay!
One thing I have in abundance here is bags. They’re not much
different than kitchen trash bags, though I’m sure they cost $50,000
because NASA.
In addition to being our commander, Lewis was also the geologist.
She was going to collect rock and soil samples from all over the
operational area (10 km radius). Weight limits restricted how much she
could actually bring back, so she was going to collect first, then sort out
the most interesting 50kg to take home. The bags are to store and tag the
samples. Some are smaller than a Ziploc, while others are as big as a
Hefty lawn and leaf bag.
Also, I have duct tape. Ordinary duct tape, like you buy at a hardware
store. Turns out even NASA can’t improve on duct tape.
I cut up a few Hefty sized bags and taped them together to make a sort
of tent. Really it was more of a super-sized bag. I was able to cover the
whole table where my Hydrazine mad scientist set-up was. I put a few
knickknacks on the table to keep the plastic out of the iridium bowl.
Thankfully, the bags are clear, so I can still see what’s going on.
Next, I sacrificed a spacesuit to the cause. I needed an air hose. I have
a surplus of space suits, after all. A total of seven; one for each
crewmember and one spare. So I don’t mind murdering one of them.
I cut a hole in the top of the plastic and duct taped the hose in place.
Nice seal, I think.
With some more string from Johannsen’s clothing, I hung the other
end of the hose from the top of the Hab's dome by two angled threads (to
keep them well clear of the hose opening). Now I had a little chimney.
The hose was about 1cm wide. Hopefully a good aperture.
The hydrogen will be hot after the reaction, and it'll want to go up. So
I’ll let it go up the chimney, then burn it as it comes out.
Then I had to invent fire.
NASA put a lot of effort in to making sure nothing here can burn.
Everything is made of metal or flame retardant plastic and the uniforms
are synthetic. I needed something that could hold a flame, some kind of
pilot light. I don't have the skills to keep enough H2 flowing to feed a
flame without killing myself. Too narrow a margin there.
After a search of everyone’s personal items (hey, if they wanted
privacy, they shouldn’t have abandoned me on Mars with their stuff) I
found my answer.
Martinez is a devout catholic. I knew that. What I didn’t know was he
brought along a small wooden cross. I’m sure NASA gave him shit about
it, but I also know Martinez is one stubborn son-of-a-bitch.
I chipped his sacred religious item into long splinters using a pair of
pliers and a screwdriver. I figure if there’s a God, He won’t mind,
considering the situation I’m in.
Ruining the only religious icon I have leaves me vulnerable to Mars
Vampires. I’ll have to risk it.
There were plenty of wires and batteries around to make a spark. But
you can’t just ignite wood with a small electric spark. So I collected
ribbons of bark from local palm trees, then got a couple of sticks and
rubbed them together to create enough friction to...
No not really. I vented pure oxygen at the stick and gave it a
spark. .... lit up like a match.
With my mini-torch in hand, I started a slow Hydrazine flow. It
sizzled on the iridium and disappeared. Soon I had short bursts of flame
sputtering from the chimney.
The main thing I had watch was the temperature. Hydrazine breaking
down is extremely exothermic. So I’d do it a bit at a time, constantly
watching the readout of a thermocouple I’d attached to the iridium
chamber.
Point is, the process worked!
Each Hydrazine tank holds a little over 50L, which would be enough
to make 100L of water. I’m limited by my oxygen production, but I’m all
excited now, so I'm willing to use half my reserves. Long story short, I’ll
stop when the tank is half-empty, and I’ll have 50L or water at th